src/blog/redesign.md, before:

---
title: Redesigning the website
description: Woah
date: 2024-04-02
---

# Redesigning the website

Yes, I changed the design of this website **again**. But it was worth it!
This'll be the last time for a while too (I think). The first time I redid the
website [was a month ago](/blog/new-look/). But that was a **complete
overhaul**, not just a visual redesign, like this one. I'm still using
[11ty](https://www.11ty.dev/) and GitHub Pages for this site. My goal is to not
become a blog redesign addict, so I will try my very best to hold off on
changing anything major for a while. Anyway, in this post, I'm going to talk
about the new look!

## Changes

For the record, here's what the blog looked like before:

![the old blog home page](/img/redesign/old_blog.png)

As you can probably tell, there's a lot that's different, so to make things a
little bit easier, I'm going to go over them in order from most obvious to least
obvious.

I'll start with the colors. I didn't really like the goldish-brown color scheme
of the old look, so that was one of the first things that I changed. The black
and white color has been really nice because I can focus more on contrast,
spacing, and font, instead of worrying about the many intricacies of colors. In
my opinion, the monochrome design looks a lot cleaner!

The next thing I'll talk about is the font. I'm not a typography expert, but I
personally like serif fonts much more than sans-serif. I think they're much
easier to read, and they fit the "blog style" a lot better. The previous font
was called [Ubuntu](https://fonts.google.com/specimen/Ubuntu). Now, I'm using
[Frank Ruhl Libre](https://fonts.google.com/specimen/Frank+Ruhl+Libre). Even
though I prefer the serif font visually, finding the
[perfect fallback font](https://css-tricks.com/books/greatest-css-tricks/perfect-font-fallbacks/)
for Frank Ruhl Libre was _very difficult_. My
[CLS](https://web.dev/articles/cls) scores were abysmal when I switched, and it
took me a long time to find the perfect settings. I ended up using a
modification of the
[Georgia](<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Georgia_(typeface)>) font. The exact
font family modifications were generated with
[capsize](https://github.com/seek-oss/capsize) and are available in the
[source code](https://github.com/dzfrias/website/blob/5268c3858e18220a9a4d04f0173f1dfe71939dab/src/css/variables.scss#L3)
of this website.

I also changed the layout, but this was by far the most subtle modification.
Instead of being centered, the main elements now have a slight preference to the
left. I thought it made the blog posts just a little bit easier to read.

## Wrap-Up

So that's what I've changed! I also made a [fancy new logo](/img/logo.png) based
on the initials of my name, but I think that's less relevant not very relevant
to the site design itself. I'll conclude this post by saying that **website
design is difficult**, and sometimes more frustrating than the systems
programming that I usually do. Honestly, I've found any sort of visual art in
general quite hard; it seems like the more that I stare at something I've
created, the less helpful my critique is. It's honestly helpful to take a break
for a day and look at it with fresh eyes the next morning.

If you had any issues or suggestions for the post, feel free to
[submit an issue](https://github.com/dzfrias/website/issues/new) on this
website's GitHub repository!

Commit message:

Add description to latest post

src/blog/redesign.md, after:

---
title: Redesigning the website
description: The blog went through another redesign! This post goes over
some of the change I made.
date: 2024-04-02
---

# Redesigning the website

Yes, I changed the design of this website **again**. But it was worth it!
This'll be the last time for a while too (I think). The first time I redid the
website [was a month ago](/blog/new-look/). But that was a **complete
overhaul**, not just a visual redesign, like this one. I'm still using
[11ty](https://www.11ty.dev/) and GitHub Pages for this site. My goal is to not
become a blog redesign addict, so I will try my very best to hold off on
changing anything major for a while. Anyway, in this post, I'm going to talk
about the new look!

## Changes

For the record, here's what the blog looked like before:

![the old blog home page](/img/redesign/old_blog.png)

As you can probably tell, there's a lot that's different, so to make things a
little bit easier, I'm going to go over them in order from most obvious to least
obvious.

I'll start with the colors. I didn't really like the goldish-brown color scheme
of the old look, so that was one of the first things that I changed. The black
and white color has been really nice because I can focus more on contrast,
spacing, and font, instead of worrying about the many intricacies of colors. In
my opinion, the monochrome design looks a lot cleaner!

The next thing I'll talk about is the font. I'm not a typography expert, but I
personally like serif fonts much more than sans-serif. I think they're much
easier to read, and they fit the "blog style" a lot better. The previous font
was called [Ubuntu](https://fonts.google.com/specimen/Ubuntu). Now, I'm using
[Frank Ruhl Libre](https://fonts.google.com/specimen/Frank+Ruhl+Libre). Even
though I prefer the serif font visually, finding the
[perfect fallback font](https://css-tricks.com/books/greatest-css-tricks/perfect-font-fallbacks/)
for Frank Ruhl Libre was _very difficult_. My
[CLS](https://web.dev/articles/cls) scores were abysmal when I switched, and it
took me a long time to find the perfect settings. I ended up using a
modification of the
[Georgia](<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Georgia_(typeface)>) font. The exact
font family modifications were generated with
[capsize](https://github.com/seek-oss/capsize) and are available in the
[source code](https://github.com/dzfrias/website/blob/5268c3858e18220a9a4d04f0173f1dfe71939dab/src/css/variables.scss#L3)
of this website.

I also changed the layout, but this was by far the most subtle modification.
Instead of being centered, the main elements now have a slight preference to the
left. I thought it made the blog posts just a little bit easier to read.

## Wrap-Up

So that's what I've changed! I also made a [fancy new logo](/img/logo.png) based
on the initials of my name, but I think that's less relevant not very relevant
to the site design itself. I'll conclude this post by saying that **website
design is difficult**, and sometimes more frustrating than the systems
programming that I usually do. Honestly, I've found any sort of visual art in
general quite hard; it seems like the more that I stare at something I've
created, the less helpful my critique is. It's honestly helpful to take a break
for a day and look at it with fresh eyes the next morning.

If you had any issues or suggestions for the post, feel free to
[submit an issue](https://github.com/dzfrias/website/issues/new) on this
website's GitHub repository!
